[Music]
one of the ultimate expressions of
female choice can be found high above
the forest floor of Papua New Guinea
[Music]
male rhaggy are no birds of paradise
[Laughter]
[Music]
everything about these ostentatious
birds has been fashioned by countless
generations of difficult to please hens
dawn breaks with their noisy clamor so
the dowdy females can easily locate the
groups of displaying names they visit
one site after another judging each
individual by his performance their
arrival causes a flurry of excitement
[Music]
at each site
one male occupies a central position
which is more attractive to the hens it
takes seven years before the male's
mature and acquire their ravishing
plumes
by contrast the hens are ready to mate
much sooner and tend to outnumber the
male's display perches are used year
after year but only the most virile
males hold the best positions center
stage in a forest so rich in fruit the
females can rear their chicks alone
the males are merely a colourful sperm
bank such independence means that the
hens can shop around for the most
exciting males
[Laughter]
each generation of females chooses just
a few elite males the majority are
doomed never to breathe
[Music]
this male is lucky but even now at the
moment of mating he cannot be absolutely
sure that he'll father the females next
brood
[Music]
male humpback whales repeat each other's
songs and add to them
so they become ever more complex and
beautiful showing off their memory as
well as sheer volume
this think carefully - this song is a
female humpback whale she's here with
last year's calf and is ready to
conceive another one
he stopped singing and follows her he
may sing to her again but not if he
thinks other males are close by they
start to get to know each other it's an
old-fashioned slow motion once
[Music]
such beautiful movement is rarely seen
dance in the animal world is little
understood
[Music]
but they're courting ballet is about to
be cut short rival males have detected
that something is going on they arrive
in force a mob on the dance floor set on
disruption each male tries to get beside
the female and to intimidate the others
the 35-ton males are set on a fight
animals that could seem so tender in a
moment become so aggressive
the mating game has become a battle
they smash into our they tail slap and
Bella
most of this is just shown throwing
their weight around
it's over the biggest male has one
sometimes they can fly more than six
kilometers to get enough nectar and
pollen back because they need a
plentiful and vast supply it's a huge
problem and to solve that problem
requires massive organization fellow
bees have an almost incredible solution
adam has set up an observation hive it's
completely dark inside
and so infrared cameras reveal what's
going on there's all sorts of babies
going on initially it looks very chaotic
it looks like bees are everywhere but
you can see some vibrations going on and
some movements that are actually part of
a very sophisticated communication
system
the bees perform a striking behavior
that's key to solving the problem of
gathering enough food it's called the
waggle dance now waggle dance is a very
sophisticated way of directing foragers
towards nectar in the environment so
it's sat-nav of bees it's telling them
where to go
[Music]
the waggle dance isn't just for show
this bee has found a good source of food
and she's performing a set of very
precise movements to tell the others
exactly where to find it and it tells
them the direction and the distance of
the nectar the best way to understand
how the waggle dance actually works is
to get up high because then you can get
a view of the landscape in which the
bees are operating this church tower
gives Adam a bees eye view of the
landscape
from up here it's easy to see where the
Sun lies over the landscape and where it
would be if it were on the horizon so
you imagine the Sun drops down to the
horizon that's the line the bees have to
follow and that's what the waggle house
is doing it's giving them direction
one of the dancing bees in the hive was
waggling at an angle of five degrees so
if this tower were a massive beehive the
waggle dance would be telling us that
the nectar is five degrees from the
relative position of the Sun somewhere
in that direction
but they can also advertise distance
because the duration of that waggle run
at a central component tells the bees
how far away the resources the closer it
is the shorter the waggle run in Papua
New Guinea the bowerbird has lovingly
rebuilt and redecorated his Bower
another visitor this time it's a female
this is just where he wants her time to
begin the show first he expands his
pupils alternately
[Music]
it's an oddly mesmerizing display
a spot of limbering up accompanied by a
weird and wheezy call from deep in his
throat now it's time for his grand
performance he waves his wing like a
Matadors cape she appears to be
transfixed this is certainly eye
catching but it seems he needs to do
more generously she drops him a hint
it's the bird equivalent of a bouquet of
flowers
[Laughter]
it's all going so well it's time to get
physical with a few head butts to her
chest one final flourish to cap weeks of
effort but something's wrong his rival
is back and at the worst possible moment
what should he do
[Applause]
for the female the moment has gone
sometimes whatever you do things just
don't work out spider silk with the
scent of a female he just needs to
follow it wherever it leads him
[Music]
other males have gone on the same quest
and have come to a grisly end
[Music]
here's the female and she doesn't look
very amorous
in fact she kills every male who doesn't
match up to her expectations what can he
do to win her over
[Music]
dance dance for his life he will need a
show-stopping trick to avoid becoming
lunch
[Music]
with his fan unfurled he begins an ever
more complicated series of dance moves
to try and seduce her
[Music]
at last she succumbs to his advances and
allows him to mate with her
[Music]
he matched her expectations but she
kills him anyway
[Music]